docs: add H2 2023 roadmap (#82)
pl-strflt/ipdx: ROADMAP.md

> # H2 2023

Author: ```suggestion
# IPDX Roadmap H2 2023
```

Additionally, we'd like to use GitHub Observability to identify more workflows that would benefit from PL Self-Hosted Runners.

## Release Gateway Conformance v1

In H2 we want to conclude IPDX's active development of Gateway Conformance. Ideally, we'd like to attract Gateway implementation maintainers to become active contributors to the project. We're going to continue to serve as maintainers, review PRs and provide guidance.

To be able to call Gateway Conformance ready for this, we should:
- achieve test coverage parity with Kubo sharness tests
- improve DX/UX around test expectations and names
- start running Gateway Conformance against a gateway external to PL

In terms of promotion of Gateway Conformance, we'd like to:
- give a talk about Gateway Conformance during IPFS Camp
- continue support of using Gateway Conformance in project Rhea

As stretch goals for the Gateway Conformance initiative, we identified:
- closer integration with specs repository/IPIP process

> - creation of dashboard encompassing all gateway implementations

Author: We already generate HTML reports so it might be a matter of aggregating and exposing the results in an accessible way. I know @laurentsenta also has some cool ideas around testing public gateways without their active participation.

> - creation of dashboard encompassing all gateway implementations

Reviewer: 👍 ideally I would like to run this in CI, maybe not on every PR, but on nightly jobs.
dropped some notes in https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/issues/104#issuecomment-1621824253

> - creation of dashboard encompassing all gateway implementations

Reviewer 2: Great thanks.  I responded in https://github.com/ipfs/gateway-conformance/issues/104#issuecomment-1621944117

## Increase PL Self-Hosted Runners Relevance

> With the recent cost-reduction effort in the PL self-hosted runners space the project is well positioned to serve the needs of PL developers already. As of now there are 2 areas that we'd like to look more closely into:

Author: > Let's be clear about what costs we're reducing with self-hosted runners. I assume we're talking about increasing developer productivity (rather than saving infra dollars).

Author: Oh no, here I meant actual infra dollars 💰 We reduced PL self-hosted runners cost by 5x between May and June which makes me waaay more confident to go and encourage people to use them. I think this section could use some more stats though. I think a general overview of how cheap/expensive it is to use self-hosted runners and how much time it can save could be in order.

Reviewer 2: Ok, got it.  Correct me if this is wrong:
Github hosted runners don't cost us any infra dollars but can be slower in execution, don't provide much configurability, and maybe have less debugability.
Self-hosted runners can reduce execution environments or allow for specialized hardware needs, but they do cost infra dollars.
Basically there are pros and cons here.  Optimizing for developer productivity is generally the right way to bias, but it's a balance.  For example, we aren't going to take a goal to get a high percentage of self-hosted runners (unless we were confident that it was indeed increasing developer productivity to warrant the cost).

Author: That's correct. Hosted free but we can only use 20 of them at a time per org and we are stuck with a default configuration. Self-hosted - as many as we want and in any config we want but they cost us money. I agree that we shouldn't make usage of self-hosted runners a goal on its' own. What I was trying to convey is that with the self-hosted runners' infra-dollar cost reductions, they are a valid solution whenever we face a bottleneck problem across PL.

Author: ```suggestion
With the recent $ cost reduction efforts in the PL self-hosted runners space the project is well positioned to serve the needs of PL developers already i.e. we feel confident it's the correct solution to apply to increase developer speed when faced with GitHub hosted runners bottleneck problem. As of now there are 2 areas that we'd like to look more closely into:
```

- windows runners (we already had them set up at the beginning so it's just a matter of resurrecting the configuration)
- decreasing boot time (currently the runners take up to 2 minutes to boot up)

## Expand IPDX Comms

We want to continue living close to our developers. That's why we're going to continue releasing **What's new in GitHub?** issues on a monthly basis. What's more, we'd like to start a new regular newsletter about productivity tips. Finally, we'd like to start tracking [developer happiness](https://github.blog/2023-06-08-developer-experience-what-is-it-and-why-should-you-care/) among IP Stewards. To begin with, we're going to prepare surveys for IP Stewards developers that are going to be issued on a regular basis.

When it comes to external comms, we'd like to actively participate in IPFS Camp and GitHub Universe conferences.

## Release Unified CI 2.0

> In August, we're going to release new version of Unified CI with Go 1.21 support. With that release, we'd like to transition to [Unified CI 2.0](https://github.com/protocol/.github/issues/514) which should encompass all the learning that we gathered by running Unified CI in its' current form for years. This includes but is not limited to:

Reviewer 3: Is there any chance we could get standardized release-please (or other Pr-based release) support with unified CI 2.0?

It would be great if, by project, could simply say "releaseMethod: immediate|pull".

For webui and desktop, i've been wanting to move to a PR based release, while having almost everything else automatically release to npm. 

Also, it would be great to standardize, or even automate, dependency creating PRs in unified CI 2.0. E.g.
- Webui release requires PR to desktop and kubo
- Kubo release requires PR to ipfs-desktop
- I'm unaware of others but you may be

Author: Indirectly, yes. With the entire Unified CI 2.0 plan, I'd like for it to be easier to have more opt-in workflows in Unified CI. I think what you're describing fits that model very well! So, all in all, I'd like to deliver the architectural changes first, and then we can switch our focus to expanding what uCI offers.

As for the dependency updates, I think that's something we could use dependabot for, right? That's also something that will be easier once Unified CI 2.0 is out (right now too lenient dependabot config would try to mess with uCI workflows).

- versioning Unified CI
- embracing reusable workflows
- centralising auomerge functionality
- allowing configurability through dot files
- simplifying enrollment with invite to deploy strategy

> All of the above will make Unified CI more robust, easier to manage and it will increase it chances to last for another couple of years. Moreover, it will open up doors for even more automation across hundreds of repositories, like using dependabot for Unified CI updates for example.

Author: Right now it's web3-bot which is our bot that we manage. In my vision, we could leverage the official dependabot to take care of the updates. It would mean less maintenance for us and I think it'd be a better experience for developers too as the updates would be spread throughout the week better so we would have to deal with running out of free hosted runners as much.

> All of the above will make Unified CI more robust, easier to manage and it will increase it chances to last for another couple of years. Moreover, it will open up doors for even more automation across hundreds of repositories, like using dependabot for Unified CI updates for example.

Reviewer 2: Oh yeah - thanks - that makes sense!

> All of the above will make Unified CI more robust, easier to manage and it will increase it chances to last for another couple of years. Moreover, it will open up doors for even more automation across hundreds of repositories, like using dependabot for Unified CI updates for example.

Author: ```suggestion
All of the above will make Unified CI more robust, easier to manage and it will increase it chances to last for another couple of years. Moreover, it will open up doors for even more automation across hundreds of repositories, like using dependabot (instead of web3-bot that has to be maintained by IPDX) for Unified CI updates for example.
```

## Immerse Into the Day to Day of IP JS Developer

> As one of the most underresourced projects within IP Stewards group, we think it is the best target for our research. We want to embed with the team for a while to uncover areas of potential DX improvements. By the end of this excercise we want to have a concrete, prioritised list of improvements that would make life of a IP JS developer easier.

Reviewer 3: 👏

> As one of the most underresourced projects within IP Stewards group, we think it is the best target for our research. We want to embed with the team for a while to uncover areas of potential DX improvements. By the end of this excercise we want to have a concrete, prioritised list of improvements that would make life of a IP JS developer easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As one of the most under-resourced projects within IP Stewards group, it is the best target for our research. We want to embed with the team for a while to uncover areas of potential DX improvements. By the end of this exercise, we want to have a concrete, prioritized list of improvements that would make the life of IP JS developers easier.
```

## Improve the Day to Day of Kubo/Boxo Developer

We've been focusing on Kubo/Boxo developers in H1 2023. In H2, we'd like to work on the work items that we identified throughout the process. The main projects we envision are:

> - create a general solution for identifyin flaky tests within Go ecosystem

Author: > This seems much broader than Kubo/Boxo (which is great).
In a similar vein, I could see value in helping out the go monorepos we have in our midst: https://github.com/pl-strflt/ipdx/issues/80

Author: Totally! Kubo/Boxo are just nice places for us to start since we can easily access the developers. I agree on https://github.com/pl-strflt/ipdx/issues/80

```suggestion
- create a general solution for identifying flaky tests within Go ecosystem
- create a general solution for [enforcing constraints on dependencies within Go ecosystem](https://github.com/pl-strflt/ipdx/issues/80)
```

- automate CHANGELOG update reminders
- fix the shortcomings of testing and coverage at the cross section of Kubo and Boxo
- deprecate sharness tests
- execute kuboreleaser in GitHub Actions

> ## Explore DX of Building on IPFS Stack

Author: > I like the direction of this one. It depends on the IPFS 2023H2 planning, but I am anticipating a major push around debuggability within our stack (which could be a joint effort between Kubo, Helia, IPDX, and probelab). Basically, how to crack open the IPFS black box so its self-service for anyone to understand why "IPFS isn't working" or "IPFS is slow".

Author: That's great news! We're really happy to hear that :) @laurentsenta is amazing at discovering opporunities for improvement in this area so our thinking is that with a little bit more structure this could be an initiative that's impactful across the ecosystem.

Author: ```suggestion
## Explore DX of Building on IPFS Stack

A major push around debuggability within our stack is expected to happen. This is a great opportunity to kick start a joint effort between Kubo, Helia, IPDX, and probelab. 
```

Through our work on Gateway Conformance we discovered that building on IPFS stack is not easy, even for people close to the ecosystem. We'd like to start a standalone project that would help us explore this further. The very rough game plan is:
1. Start a simple project that cuts through all the layers of IPFS stack (working idea - decentralised DropBox).
2. Consume the publicly available documentation to implement the project.
3. Document usability sharp edges and documentation shortcomings.
4. Contribute usability fixes to the IPFS stack.

Our thinking is that this exercise could attract more active contributors to the IPFS stack thus reducing strain on IP Stewards.

> This is a project that sparks joy for Laurent 💖

Reviewer: <3

We want to continue living close to our developers. That's why we're going to continue releasing **What's new in GitHub?** issues on a monthly basis. What's more, we'd like to start a new regular newsletter about productivity tips. Finally, we'd like to start tracking [developer happiness](https://github.blog/2023-06-08-developer-experience-what-is-it-and-why-should-you-care/) among IP Stewards. To begin with, we're going to prepare surveys for IP Stewards developers that are going to be issued on a regular basis.

When it comes to external comms, we'd like to actively participate in IPFS Camp and GitHub Universe conferences.

## Release Unified CI 2.0

In August, we're going to release new version of Unified CI with Go 1.21 support. With that release, we'd like to transition to [Unified CI 2.0](https://github.com/protocol/.github/issues/514) which should encompass all the learning that we gathered by running Unified CI in its' current form for years. This includes but is not limited to:
- versioning Unified CI
- embracing reusable workflows
- centralising auomerge functionality
- allowing configurability through dot files
- simplifying enrollment with invite to deploy strategy

> All of the above will make Unified CI more robust, easier to manage and it will increase it chances to last for another couple of years. Moreover, it will open up doors for even more automation across hundreds of repositories, like using dependabot (instead of web3-bot that has to be maintained by IPDX) for Unified CI updates for example.

Author: ```suggestion
All of the above will make Unified CI more robust, easier to manage and it will increase it chances to last for another couple of years. Moreover, it will open up doors for even more automation across hundreds of repositories, like using dependabot (instead of web3-bot that has to be maintained by IPDX) for Unified CI updates, or maintaining multiple variants of releaser workflows (e.g. release-please vs version.json vs PR).
```
